- Hello, everyone.
Good morning and welcome to the
Java and WebObjects Overview session.
My name is Francois Jouaux and I am
the system tools manager at Apple,
which includes the
Java and WebObjects teams.
I think it would be better
if I use my clicker.
This session is about Java cross-platform
development on Mac OS X.
Whether you are a new or
seasoned Java developer on
a Mac Pro or a MacBook Pro,
Whether you're targeting
Java desktop applications or
heavy-duty server solutions,
this session is for you.
This is not a session
about Java on the iPhone.
Although we believe that there
is an opportunity for WebObjects
application servers as application
servers for iPhone-based,
whether native or web applications.
So what's new about Java?
A month ago, we attended Java 1,
and it really looks like Mac laptops
have become the development platform,
the Java development platform of choice.
They were everywhere,
in the audience more than ever.
On stage, they were running their
presentation on Macs,
but also all the coolest demos in
the biggest keynotes run on Macs.
even the latest JavaFX demos.
The reason is backstage more
and more Sun engineers are using
Macs as their Java development
platform of choice as well.
This is really a tribute to the quality
of the Java implementation on Mac OS X.
And this slide is also here to
remind you to download the latest
Java 6 on your MacBook Air.
It will not only keep levitating,
but it will also fly.
Combining Java and WebObjects,
we believe,
gives you the strongest enterprise
development and deployment platform.
So WebObjects community
is alive and strong.
Over last weekend,
we attended a pre-WWDC WebObjects
conference that was impressive
by the number of attendees,
50% more than last year,
and impressive by the quality and
complexity of the solutions presented.
It has been true for the last 10 years.
Every year,
web designers and standard committees
throw at us new web technologies,
and every year,
WebObjects adapts to them.
With the latest multi-core Macs combined
With the just announced
Snow Leopard 64-bit OS,
we believe that you have at
your fingertip an incredible,
immense amount of computing power.
Java 64-bit has been shipping
for more than six months.
And with Java and WebObjects,
you are best positioned to take
advantage of this computing power.
So our agenda of the day is quite simple.
We will spend half of the session talking
about Java enhancement in Snow Leopard,
and the other half about the latest
WebObjects features and releases.
So who are the Mac guys of the day?
Well, first we'll start with Tom O'Brien,
a beloved Java engineering manager,
followed by Pierre Frisch that
everybody knows as a WebObjects manager,
and his sidekick, Daryl Lee,
our demo guru of the day.
But forget the Mac guys,
it's all about Snow Leopard
and Java 64-bit,
along with WebObjects.
So Tom, come on up.
Thank you, Francois.
Francois is a great choice for
waking everyone up at 9 o'clock
in the morning on day two.
Quick show of hands,
how many of you in the audience
are experienced Java developers
who are new to the Mac platform?
Okay, great.
And how many of you are Java developers
who have been with us developing
on Mac OS X for quite a while?
We have news today that's going
to be interesting to both of you.
We're going to start out with a
quick overview of Java on Mac OS X,
especially for those of you
who are new to the platform,
just to recap some of the
most important points.
We'll also highlight a few of the
updates that we've shipped in the
past year for Java on Mac OS X.
We'll tell you the latest
about Java 6 and 64-bit.
We'll give you some pointers to
some great UI enhancements you
can make to your applications to
make them really look great on
Mac OS X but stay cross-platform.
And we'll tell you about a
couple other efforts that have
been going on this past year in
SWT and in the Java plug-in space.
and we're also going to be looking
at the Java that you're getting
at the Snow Leopard preview
at the conference this week.
So if you're new to Mac OS X,
a key point about Java on Mac OS X is
that it's a core framework.
It's been built into the operating
system since the very first release.
Unlike on other platforms,
Java is part of the operating system
so you don't have to bundle it with
your application and you don't have
to deal with installation issues
and configuration issues for your
customers because they've already got
a Java version that runs great with
your application on their system.
As a core feature of Mac OS X,
Java is available in all the
deployment modes that you're used
to and your customers expect.
Applets running in the web browser,
WebStart applications,
double-clickable bundled
applications on the desktop,
and command line and server code.
As Java developers, you already know,
or you should know if you're
coming to the platform,
that the Java code that you depend
on to develop your applications
and the Java applications you
ship run great on Mac OS X.
So tools like Idea and Eclipse,
Apache Tomcat,
and many more are all running
great with the built-in
Java that's on Mac OS X today.
And it can be true of your
apps that you develop as well.
The next key point about Java on
Mac OS X is that at any time we
focus our efforts on one preferred
Java VM for a particular hardware and
software configuration and OS release.
And over the releases of Mac OS X,
we've moved that preferred
Java version forward,
starting with Java 1.3.1 and the very
first release of Mac OS X years ago,
moving forward to current
releases where we have Java 1.5
as the preferred version.
As we move the preferred
Java version forward,
we transition our efforts off of older
versions to focus our attention on the
latest preferred Java version to keep it
the most compatible and most stable and
secure for you and for your customers.
So at this point in Leopard,
the preferred Java version is Java 1.5.
But let's take a closer look
at the Java versions that
are available on Leopard.
First, as I said, Java 1.5, Java SE 5.0,
to use its full Sun marketing name,
is available on Leopard,
and it's the focus because it supports
the range of hardware that is the
supporting configurations for Leopard.
It's available in both
Intel 64 and 32-bit versions,
as well as PowerPC.
[Transcript missing]
There's also a Java 6 version,
a Java 1.6 version available for Leopard
for Intel 64-bit hardware that allows
you to move forward to 64-bit and to
Java 6 with your applications and get a
jump on the future of Java in Mac OS X.
Because there can be multiple
versions of Java available
on the platform at any point,
users have the option of choosing
a different Java version to run
as their version rather than the
default preferred version that
we set for that configuration.
Most customers don't need to change this,
but you should be aware
that it's an option.
And if they want to, for their particular
configuration or their needs,
they can override the versions by
reordering the list of available
VMs in this list so that they launch
applications in a VM of their choosing
that's available on the system.
They can also change the version
that they use for launching
applets in web browsers.
So these version settings let you or your
users control which versions are being
launched on that particular machine,
on that particular configuration
for double-clickable applications,
for WebStart applications, for applets.
And a new feature we added in Leopard
that you're probably aware of if
you were here at the conference
last year is that this also changes
the version of Java run on the
command line for command line code.
Speaking of the command line, again,
if you're new to the platform,
there are a couple key file system
path tips that you should know
about if you're an experienced
Java developer coming to Mac OS X.
There's two main paths you should know.
First, user bin Java is a symbolic link
that tracks the Java version that
is selected in the Java preferences
application that I just showed you.
So that can change both on different
versions of Mac OS X and even on
individual customers' machines,
but it'll track the version that is the
most compatible for their situation.
LibraryJava Home is fixed for
the particular configuration and
release of Java and the operating
system on that machine by Apple,
and that tracks the preferred
Java version that Apple has set.
So, for example, in Leopard,
LibraryJava Home is a reference
to Java 1.5's LibraryJava Home.
Now because Java is a framework,
like other frameworks on Mac OS X,
it lives in system library frameworks.
But relying on any paths that are
inside system library frameworks
is really fragile and is prone to
breaking and compatibility issues
as we change versions of Java or
move the operating system forward.
So if you need to rely
on file system paths,
pick one of those first two.
Let's take a quick look at a couple
of the recent Java updates that
we've shipped over the past year.
At the conference last year,
you got updated versions of
Java in the Leopard preview
that was shipped 12 months ago.
And we also shipped a version
of Java 6 as a developer preview
that would run on Leopard.
In the fall, when Leopard GMed,
there were even newer versions of
Java 1.4.2 and Java 1.5 in that GM build.
And we also shipped in
December an update for Tiger,
Mac OS 10.4,
to bring its Java 1.4 and 1.5
versions up to date with the latest
versions available at that point.
And that was a very focused release,
mostly focused on getting those
versions to change and be compatible.
We continued doing developer
previews of Java 6 for Leopard,
and we shipped the GM version of the
Java 6 update in April of this year.
And now at the conference this week,
there's an even newer Java in
the build that you're getting
in the Snow Leopard preview.
One of the essential ways that we
move Java forward on the Mac for
compatibility and for making sure it's
best for your customers is to listen
to your bug requests and enhancement
requests and respond to them in updates.
For example, in Leopard,
we dealt with a wide range of issues
in moving the operating system forward
to newer versions of Java and making
it the best possible Java on Leopard.
And we also rolled in over 270 critical
issues that came from you as developers
that were important for moving
Java forward for your particular needs.
In the Tiger update last fall,
which I said was a very focused update
and had a very narrow range of bugs,
mostly based on moving
the Java versions forward,
we still managed to bring in 25% of the
bugs as critical developer fixes for key
issues that were needed for compatibility
on Tiger for critical customers.
And in the Java 6 update
that we GMed early this year,
in addition to bringing out
a whole new version of Java,
we addressed over 180 bugs that
came from you as developers in
the developer previews and from
previous releases to make it the
best possible Java it could be.
All of those bugs came to
us through Bug Reporter.
And here's the URL for Bug Reporter,
which I'm sure most of
you already know about.
And if you don't, you shouldn't.
You should.
And we also rolled in over 180 bugs
that came from you as developers
in the developer previews and from
previous releases to make it the
best possible Java it could be.
Thank you.
One important thing you should
know about the bugs that come
in through Bug Reporter is that
every single feature request,
every single enhancement,
every single bug report that we get
through Bug Reporter gets read by
Apple Engineering within 48 hours.
We use your information that you
provide in the bugs to prioritize
our work and to focus our attention
on things that will make it the best
possible Java for you on Mac OS X.
If you're already working on Mac OS X,
you almost certainly know about JavaDev.
And if you're new to Mac OS X,
it's a great place to
learn more about Java.
JavaDev is an active discussion
list where new Java developers on
Mac OS X come to learn more about the
platform and where experienced developers
can have in-depth discussions with
Apple engineers about Java on Mac OS X.
Here's the URL, and we'll be putting
it up again at the end,
but here's the URL for
getting on the JavaDev list.
Okay, that is our quick overview
of Java on Mac OS X,
especially for those of you who are new
to the platform to get you oriented.
Let's talk about a couple of -- let's
highlight a couple of enhancements
that have been happening to Java on
Mac OS X over the past year since
the last developer conference.
One of the key things that we
improved in Leopard was an ability
for you to add great user interface
enhancements to your swing application
to make it look great on Mac OS X.
With swing client properties
that are custom for
Mac OS X but are cross-platform,
you can take this GUI,
which is built with
standard swing components,
and add cross-platform code and make
it look even better on Mac OS X.
This is the same components
using the swing client
properties that are available,
and this code continues to run and
work on other platforms just great,
but it looks even better on Mac OS X.
It really looks at home on Mac OS X with
the enhancements you can use.
We've been adding even more ability
for you to add the polish to your
Java applications on Mac OS X that
your users expect and really give
them the extra touches that they
expect out of Mac applications.
For example,
a long-standing feature request was
implementing modal dialogues with Sheets,
and that's now available for you to use.
We're also using the
JavaX Script API in Java 6 to
allow you to access AppleScript,
which gives your applications much
better integration with the other
applications on Mac OS X to really
get them to integrate with the rest
of the OS and the other applications
that your customers are using.
and we've added even more functionality,
like letting you add a customizable
dock menu to your application.
Again, these are great extra steps for
your application that really make
them stand out for your users and
give them the extra polish that they
expect out of a Macintosh application.
In addition to the enhancements
that we've been working on for
Java at Apple and the new releases
that we've been bringing out,
there have been other developments
in the Mac OS X Java community,
and we'll highlight a
couple of them here quickly.
First, if you're in Java development,
you almost certainly know about SWT.
SWT is the foundation toolkit
for Eclipse that the Eclipse IDE,
other IDEs,
and other applications are built on.
A critical point about SWT on Mac OS X is
that the current implementation
is based on the Carbon Framework.
and as you may know, not all of Carbon is
moving forward to 64-bit.
So in order for SWT to have a
future in the future of Mac OS X,
SWT needs to migrate
from Carbon to Cocoa.
Now,
the good news is that there's already an
effort underway to migrate SWT to Cocoa,
which will give it access to full 64-bit
support and all of the other enhancements
that are happening to the operating
system as Mac OS X moves forward.
We'll be talking more about this
in the talk in this room at 10:30,
but you should know that the
port is underway and they're
actively looking for contributors.
Another effort that's been going
on for Java in Mac OS X is the
Java plugin enhancements that Sun has
been doing over the past year.
Sun has been working on a new
out-of-process browser plugin model,
which allows the applet process that
runs your Java applet and the browser
to run separately in separate processes.
This has great advantages for stability
because suppose the Java process were
to crash and the applet were to go away.
Theoretically, it could happen.
The Java applet process can die,
but the browser process
will continue to run,
which is great for stability.
Also, because the applet and the
browser are running in completely
separate address spaces,
it has great advantages
for security as well.
It also has advantages in allowing you
to have more version flexibility in the
Java version you use to run applets.
For example,
a 32-bit-based browser could launch
Java applets running in a 64-bit VM.
For a lot more about the user interface
enhancements that we quickly went over,
the SWT Cocoa port,
and the Java plug-in work from Sun,
please stay where you are for
the talk at 10:30 in this room,
Building Great Java Applications
on Mac OS X.
So that brings us up to date
with the Java in the past,
the Java in Leopard.
Now let's take a look at the
Java you're getting in the Snow Leopard
preview at the conference this week.
First, quickly,
let's recap the Java versions
available on Leopard.
Java 5 was preferred.
It was focused on the main
compatible hardware for
Leopard that Leopard supported.
Java 1.4.2 was present
but was going away,
intended as a transition strategy.
And Java 6 was available for you as
developers for Intel 64-bit hardware
to move forward to 64-bit development
and to move forward to Java 6.
In the Snow Leopard preview that you're
getting at the conference this week,
we're making a bold jump forward.
We're moving the Java 6 preview,
the Java 6 implementation from
Leopard forward to Snow Leopard,
and we're making it the preferred
version in Snow Leopard.
Because it's also the only
version of Java in Snow Leopard,
We're making it compatible
with the supported hardware
configurations for Snow Leopard,
which means it's available for both
Intel 64 and Intel 32-bit hardware.
So the Java 6 and the Snow Leopard
Disk you're getting this week
is both Intel 32 and Intel 64.
But the really main focus
of Snow Leopard is 64-bit.
So as Java developers,
you're in a great position to
take advantage of moving your
applications forward to 64-bit.
The main advantage that you
get out of moving to 64-bit,
in fact, the fundamental advantage,
is unlimited virtual memory.
It's essentially as
much as you can count.
127 terabytes is a really,
really big number.
What you can do with that is
have giant data sets in memory.
You can run simulations of
weather across the entire globe.
You can simulate all the
air traffic in the US.
You can process medical images
that are in huge image files.
You can do many things that you
couldn't do when you were dealing with
a 32-bit VM where you were limited to
two gigabytes or less of address space.
The great news for you as
Java developers is your
application already runs in 64-bit.
Because Java's pointer size agnostic,
pure Java code moves forward
seamlessly and just can continue
running great in 64-bit.
So you have a leap ahead compared
to other developers who are
moving their applications forward.
A pure Java application running on
a 32-bit VM with 32-bit frameworks
continues to run just great on
64-bit with no change on your part.
Now, a bunch of you are already ahead
of me because you know that there
are some Java applications that
don't move forward with zero steps.
They need one more step.
If you have a Java application
with native code,
with a native JNI library
that's built for 32-bit,
when you move the Java VM and the
frameworks that it depends on forward,
there is no 64-bit version
of the JNI code that your
application is depending on.
And so your application won't launch,
it won't load because of this dependency.
There's one additional step you
need to do if you have something
that involves JNI libraries,
which is just rebuild your JNI library
to be universal so it has both
a 32-bit and a 64-bit segment,
and it will run great in
both 32-bit and 64-bit Java.
Okay, so great.
You have a head start on moving
your application forward to
64-bit as Java developers.
You've done either zero or one steps.
Your application is running great,
and you're thinking about all the
cool things you could do with all
of that enhanced address space.
Is there any downside to this?
Do you pay a performance penalty,
for example?
The great news as Java developers is that
the Java 64-bit version in Snow Leopard
runs even faster than the 32-bit version.
So you have a great,
it's up to 61% faster.
Sorry, I meant to say that magic number.
You're in a great position
as Java developers.
Your app comes over faster
than for any other developers.
If it's pure Java code, it's no steps.
Otherwise,
you have to rebuild your JNI library.
You get the advantage of all
of this great address space,
and your code runs even
faster on Snow Leopard.
You're in a great position
to move forward with 64-bit.
So let's talk about the key
points in the Snow Leopard
Preview Java that you're getting.
Java 6 is the Java in
the Snow Leopard Preview.
It's available for 64 and 32-bit.
64-bit is the default version.
You should start moving your
applications forward today to 64-bit.
Take advantage of all that address
space and work with Java 1.6.
Tell us about any issues you
find at bugreporter.apple.com,
but you really can get started today.
For a lot more about 64-bit
and the Java in Snow Leopard,
please stay where you are for the
next talk at 10:30 in this room,
Building Great Java Applications
on Mac OS X.
So we sped through a quick
tour of Java on Mac OS X.
to recap the essential things you
need to know as new developers,
new enhancements in the past year,
and Java in Snow Leopard.
What are the essential things you should
take away from this section of the talk?
First,
there's a 64-bit Java version available
for both Leopard and for Snow Leopard.
So you should get started running
your apps in 64-bit today.
Second,
learn about and take advantage of the
great enhancements that you can make
to your applications to make them
really look great on Mac OS X and
fit what your customers expect
out of a Macintosh application.
and Paul Schmitz.
And finally,
the fundamental thing under all
of this is that Java is a core
framework for Mac OS -- on Mac OS X.
It's a great foundation for
your Java development and it's a
great foundation for delivering
applications to your customers.
It's also a great foundation for
other technologies on Mac OS X.
And I'd like to welcome up Pierre Frisch,
who's going to tell you about WebObjects,
one of the great technologies
based on Java on Mac OS X.
Thank you, Tom.
So, good morning.
I'm Pierre Frisch.
I'm sure that most of you know me.
For those who don't know me, I'm Mr.
WebObject.
So what are we going to
talk about this morning?
Well, we have got quite a
number of topics to cover.
First of all,
for those who don't know WebObjects,
I'm going to go and do a small summary
of what WebObjects is all about.
Then we're going to talk about
WebObjects 5.5 and some of the future.
Then we go back on the tools and talk
about the WebObjects community and that
great event that we did last weekend.
So, what is WebObject?
WebObject is actually the
granddaddy of all the application
servers on the Internet.
WebObject was created in 1996
in Objective-C and started its
life...actually Francois was one of the
first engineers to work on WebObject.
In 2001,
WebObjects was ported to pure Java and
actually started to be really the
mainstay of the application service.
Last year,
we released version 5.4 of WebObjects,
and with Snow Leopard,
we are going to release version 5.5.
The main highlight of 5.4 was
actually compatibility with Java 5.
The main highlight of WebObjects 5.5
will be the compatibility with Java 6.
And obviously,
64-bit and all the goodies that
you get with Java 6 and 64-bit.
WebObjects is the marketplace.
Well, WebObjects, first of all,
is used internally by
Apple to run the company.
We use WebObjects for the Apple Store,
so if you bought a
Mac on the Apple Store,
you use WebObjects.
We also use it internally
to run systems like DotMacs,
eMusicStore,
which is probably one of the largest
e-commerce sites on the planet,
but we also use it internally
for manufacturing and running
our own internal business.
If you look at your Mac,
every single part of every single
machine that we manufacture is actually
tracked by a WebObjects application.
So we actually use it
for very small things,
but we also use it for huge applications.
So you can scale, and don't worry,
if you build an application
with WebObjects,
you can scale it.
Outside,
last year when I was on this stage,
I actually counted the number of
pages that you can actually see on
the internet made with WebObjects.
There was 4 million.
This year, there are 6 million.
So you have been very busy.
Thank you very much.
And that obviously doesn't
include any of the private page.
So WebObjects is well
alive and growing very,
very fast.
WebObject 5.4, what we did last year.
We released in October a new release,
5.4 with Leopard.
We released an update in February,
and today, posted on ADC,
you are going to find
WebObject 5.4.2 available.
We also cleaned up the license.
We got a lot of criticism,
so we actually made it absolutely
abundantly clear that the
WebObjects application that
you can develop on WebObjects,
you can deploy it on any machine of
any system that your customer requires.
So it's absolutely, absolutely clear.
[Transcript missing]
So I'm absolutely sure it's the first
time and last time you ever read it,
so at least you have read it once.
Anyway, so you have read the license,
you're happy with it, we can go on.
and also we fixed,
during the course of the year,
210 bug fixes.
We actually been very,
very busy on trying to fix the
bugs and make the enhancement.
And most of those bugs
actually come for you.
45% of the bugs that we fixed were
actually issues or improvement
or requests that you made.
And so it's very important that you
keep carrying on sending us requests.
33% are actually internal developers,
so that bugs that are actually
discovered or issues that are
requested by internal developer,
our own internal use.
So please carry on sending us
reports on bugreporter.apple.com.
So, now that we've seen what's passed,
what's coming?
Well, we are working on WebObjects 5.5.
5.5 is going to be
released with No Leopard.
[Transcript missing]
So, change.
A lot of things have
changed under the hood.
We try to keep the public API stable,
but...
You don't make an omelet
without breaking eggs.
Anything which is
private API has changed,
will change, and so if you subclass or
patch private internal API,
your code will break.
[Transcript missing]
So, localization.
What did we do?
We actually introduced a feature
that was requested since 1997.
And we actually moved from
language string to local,
to Java local.
So, we are all here in America and we
all know what a gas station is.
Fortunately, in England,
you go to the petrol
station to fill your tank.
or you check the level under
the bonnet and not the hood.
[Transcript missing]
We also, to make it really easy for
you to use those features,
added some localization in components.
So you can now write
Directly into your string,
a localized string,
so you can actually address from the key
and the default and you don't have to
actually write the glue in the Java code
to actually call the localized string.
So that would make your life simpler.
And the last feature in localization,
but not the least,
is we introduce geolocation.
So you can not only know what
the browser is reporting,
but you can also,
from the IP address of the browser,
know where your customer is coming from.
And even if you are in New Zealand,
which is that map of the world,
you can find the people where they are.
and for that I'm going to ask Daryl to
show you a short demo of that feature.
Okay, thank you, Pierre.
So I prefer the view of the northern
hemisphere this way on a map.
So what I'd like to show you is
a quick preview of some of the
geolocation features and just how
easy it is to use localization
tables within WebObjects 5.5.
So for this demo I'm going to actually
have to spoof some IP addresses because,
well,
we're in San Francisco right now and
I'm going to need some to generate
requests from various parts of the world.
So I create this map and say we
get a request from South Africa.
What just happened right there
is that we made a request from
the IP address 4131.255.255,
and we realized that this was in
the country region of South Africa,
and we did a lookup in
the localized table,
and we got a localized hello greeting,
hello from Cape Town.
And so let me try a
couple other addresses,
like let's go do a German one,
so Guten Tag,
or let's go to the United States here,
and...
[Transcript missing]
And so the next great feature
I want to talk to you about
in 5.5 is codeless component.
We've discovered that most of
WebObject applications write
quite a lot of glue code.
And one of them being for
the iteration variable.
So we actually made it easier for
you to not have to declare those
iteration variables in the Java code.
So instead of writing this type of code,
which is a classic way of
writing WebObject iteration,
you can now just put directly into
your Word file the iteration variable.
So don't go and write any more of those.
[Transcript missing]
and the same thing,
we went a step further.
It's that very often when you do
a repetition on a bunch of objects
that you grab from the database,
so we actually added to the repetition
a fetch binding that enabled you to
return directly a list of objects
from the fetch spec in the database.
So how does that work?
It works with using name fetch spec,
and we pass as a binding all
the values that you build
in your variable dictionary.
So actually you can make
some really interesting pages
directly without any Java code.
And for that,
Daryl is going to show you another
demo of what we can do with it.
Thank you, Pierre.
So I just wanted to give you
a quick tour of a component
that I wrote really quickly.
It's a master detail-like component.
And it kind of leverages a lot
of new features in WebRx 5.5,
but we laid down the foundation
of this with WebRx 5.4 and
the new bindings parser.
And in 5.5, as Pierre mentioned,
we introduced a fetch type of binding.
So what this little highlighted
code says here is that I want
to reference the movie entity,
and I want to call the fetch all
movies name fetch specification.
And I'm stuffing this into
a world repetition list,
and then for each item in that list,
let's stuff that into a variable name,
a movie.
And this allows us to do
a lot of great things.
So I can reference that variable
while in my repetition and
reference the title right here.
But I can also traverse relationships.
So as you can see,
I've created another repetition here,
and I'm traversing and
iterating over roles,
and I'm printing out the role
name and printing the first
and last name of the actor.
and just to show you,
I'm not writing any Java code.
Here's the basic templating code.
There's no specific bindings there,
no Java code at all.
It's purely within the
HTML code right here.
And so here's my app really
quickly and how that turns out.
And as you can see,
here's Indiana Jones movie.
The master or the movies entity is
printed on the left column right here.
If you look to the right,
we've got detailed relationship
like the studio and various
actors and actor names.
And hopefully that gives you
an idea of how just quickly
and painless it is to access
functionality and the new bindings.
So back to Pierre.
- Thank you, Darryl.
The next feature is that we
change the login in WebObject.
You have been requested
that for a number of years,
and we actually agree that
NSLog is a very nice feature,
but it's a bit complicated to use.
So instead of keeping NSLog
internally in WebObject,
we actually move to Log4j.
So actually, all of WebObject code is
moving from NSLog to Log4j.
And it's a much simpler API.
I think all of you are using it already.
You can actually turn on
and off the logging without
restarting the application,
which is a great, great feature,
because when you have got an application
that's run away in production
and you want to see something,
being able to turn on and off the
logging while the application is
running is really a great saving.
And you can also do remote logging.
Log4j will support and does
support remote logging,
so you can actually log on
a separate machine if you
need to in this production.
And I'm just going to start to show
us the logging page so that you
can actually see what's on there.
Okay, so thank you, Pierre.
So what we did is we created a component
within the Java OLO extensions,
and what it will allow you to do is
actually dynamically reconfigure the
logging for any class that you have
or that's in the WebObjects runtime.
So it's not just limited to our classes.
And it's just as easy,
or we have all the log levels
exposed right here in a pop-up.
So here's like the info level,
and we have a nice little icon
here that displays what log
level or associates that with it.
So I just want to log out
fatal errors to NSArray.
Now, we have a lot of classes within
the WebObjects runtime and
probably in your applications,
too.
So you might want to
quickly search for them.
When you want to set a custom log level.
So if I want to set something
on EO editing context,
edits.
[Transcript missing]
Thank you, Darryl.
The next feature I want to
talk about is qualifiers.
We discovered that in some cases,
the current qualifiers
are not fast enough.
And so we introduced a
new set of qualifiers,
essentially the in-qualifier
and the set qualifier,
that are now fully integrated
in the core of the WebObject.
And we did some testing on performance,
and actually on performance
with the in-qualifier versus
the set of and and ors,
or the except qualifier
of the same condition.
And running on a sustained system,
so that when the database
has time to optimize a query,
we get about 50% gain.
On a cold system,
where the database has no
chance of optimizing the query,
we can get up to 10 times faster.
So this is a great,
great way of optimizing your
queries when you have problems
in terms of performance.
I hope that you're going to like that.
And the last feature I wanted to
talk about about 5.5 is foundation.
Foundation is relying a lot on
locking and protection from threads.
We are moving to Java concurrency class,
which instead of a re-entrant,
instead of locking,
that should actually improve the
performance dramatically in some cases.
We have seen in some of our
testing for internal apps up to
50% gain on key value coding.
So this should also improve
the performance of your app.
dramatically.
The last thing is that we
actually reintegrated properly
WebObjects in the server admin,
so you can actually now
access Monitor directly
from the server admin UI.
You can also access some of the
more obscure features of WebObjects,
like you can actually go and access
the WOTA-SD configuration that
very few people know how to access,
but now it's directly in the code.
You can also look at your logs,
directly the log for Monitor and
WOTSD in the server admin,
and you can actually configure
everything directly from the admin panel.
So we hope that the server
admin panel is going to be a
lot more useful than before.
and from that,
I'm going to talk about something
that is very unusual here.
I'm talking about a
roadmap for WebObjects.
And no,
I'm not going to talk about version 66.
Okay,
so what are we working on in the future?
We are working about a new
deployment architecture.
So we are going to rewrite Monitor and
WaterSD to make them more stable,
more useful,
and give you a better ease of
deploying WebObjects application,
especially on Mac OS X,
but still keeping the
compatibility with other platforms.
We're going to add asynchronous fetch.
This has been a long-running request.
What we're going to do is enable you
to have a pool of stacks so that you
can actually fetch on various pools
and various connections transparently.
and we're working on a set of
AO extensions so that you can
actually not rewrite code all
the time for accessing user and
accessing GNDI integration so
that if you need to have the
LDAP users or access control list.
Okay, so in terms of tools, first of all,
I want to reiterate that our recommended
tools are Eclipse and Wallips.
And I know that Wallips is supported
by the community and I want to
extend a very warm thank you to
all the people that contribute.
But...
Today we are introducing one more thing.
And this is that you can access
today everything that we've
talked about this morning.
All of the features that I've
talked about this morning
are available today on ADC.
You can gain early access to everything
through what we are going to do,
which is releasing every
day our nightly build.
So you are going to find
our own Apple internal
nightly build of WebObjects,
all three versions, on ADC every day.
and for making that really
easy for you to use,
we have contributed a significant
plugin to Wallips to actually
enable you to access those,
check them, and verify that your
bugs have been fixed.
And for that,
I'm going to ask Daryl to actually
show you the demo of how it's done.
Thank you, Pierre.
So we contributed a Eclipse plug-in
or a plug-in to WorldLibs that
will enable you to link against
the Nightly Build repository.
And one of the things we did is
to make it easy for you guys is
to create some project templates.
And let me just go create a
project really quick and show
you how to access this stuff.
So what we did was actually
add two project templates,
one for creating a Maven
WebObjects application,
and then there's a
framework-styled project.
So I'm going to create a quick
application for you right now.
Let me show you some of the
significant parts of this.
So the real significant page right
here actually is the artifact page
and this particular pop-up where
you pick the WebObjects version.
And right now we have a
WebObjects 5.4.2 snapshot,
a 5.5 snapshot, and a 6.0 snapshot.
So I'm going to pick up the
WebObjects 5.5 snapshot and of
course we have a licensing text here.
I encourage you all to read that and
I'll click through that and we'll
just finish our application here.
So what that's doing is grabbing
all the necessary information
to find my local repository and
[Transcript missing]
Okay, save that, and no link errors.
We're all happy and ready to go.
So say I've got this 5.5 app,
and I'm not sure if this
feature was available in 5.4.2,
or is there a bug in 5.4.2 or 5.5
that I want to regress against?
Let me go change the
version really quick.
So I select the project properties.
here, and I select our plugin,
and it's called the Apple MIM plugin,
and let me just switch that to webbox542.
More licensing text.
But one other thing I want to point
out to you is that this is an area
where you would also customize
where your local repository is,
and there'll be more
information following that,
but these are two other fields
that you might be interested in,
the repository URLs.
Okay, so I selected webbox542,
let me hit okay, and we're rebuilding,
and all of a sudden we got a link error,
because that API is not
available in webbox542.
Okay, so that's a really quick demo,
and...
[Transcript missing]
So, after that, I want to thank you,
to extend a very warm thank you
to a number of people that works
with WebObjects and help us to
make WebObjects a very great,
great product.
First of all,
I want to extend an extremely warm
thank you to Wallips and all the people
that contribute to Wallips that made
some great tools that not only you use,
but Apple uses internally to
actually develop WebObjects
applications and that we personally
use for developing WebObjects.
So, we are using the same tools for doing
WebObjects that you are using externally.
So, thank you very much for everyone
that contributed to Wallips.
The next group that I want to
recognize is the WoW Community Group.
WoW Community Group do an awesome
job at marketing WebObjects.
WoW Community is, at the same time,
an organization and a website.
The organization that actually did the
WoW Odyssey conference last weekend,
which was extremely well
attended and there was extremely
good technical presentation,
but also maintains a website
where you can find podcasts,
you can find help, consultings,
people that you need for developing
your great WebObjects application,
and also reference sites,
applications that have been developed
with WebObjects that you can actually
use to show to your customers.
So, if you don't know WoW Community,
go and have a look.
It's really an interesting website.
and the last one I want to actually
acknowledge is Project Wander.
Project Wander is a collection
of all the frameworks and all the
bits and pieces of development
that you can find on WebObject.
If you have got a hard problem to solve,
chance are somebody did
it in Project Wander.
That's where you go if you need
to do something on WebObject.
So, in summary,
WebObject is why make your life difficult
when you can have a very simple solution?
and many more.
Really, make your life simple.
Use WebObjects.
WebObjects is a proven way to
create web applications from
the tiniest things to the very,
very large e-commerce solutions.
It's really,
really fast in development and we
are trying to make it even faster
to just make you write less code.
Really, you should try it out.
Actually,
we have got a great session coming
at 2:00 this afternoon where we have
got two trainers that are going to
build a full WebObject application
on stage in less than one hour.
So if you want to see how a
WebObject application is built,
I invite you all to come to the session
this afternoon where you're going to
see how it's done in less than an hour.
On that,
I'm going to call Francois back on stage.
- I realize that the second part of this
session was very WebObjects-centric.
For Java desktop developers,
stay tuned and stay seated
because next session,
the session starting
in about half an hour,
I'd say, will be all about Java on
the Mac OS X on Snow Leopard.
So the conference is young.
We know that throughout the
week you're going to hear about
competing server technologies such
as Ruby on Rails on whichever new
interpreted web stuff there is,
I don't know.
Let me restate a simple fact.
Mac OS X server, Java, WebObjects,
all of Apple's business is
built on these technologies.
Every way money comes into
Apple goes through Java.
We are not taking chance
with anything else.
The question is,
should you take any chance?
At this point of the presentation,
I'd like to welcome my co-presenters to
come back on stage and prepare for Q&A.
But in the meantime,
I have a few announcements to make.
For more information,
please contact Matt Trans,
who was brave enough to
put his email on the slide.
And you can also participate in the
Java Dev and WebObjects dev mailing list,
but be aware these
lists are not under NDA,
so you cannot discuss whatever
you have learned today.
Documentation sample code,
the demo code that Daryl
has so well presented,
will be available on the
developer.apple.com WODC website.
We have two related sessions,
one right after on Java,
one this afternoon on WebObjects.
We also have two labs throughout the week
and a WebObjects community gathering.